Writing R packages
================

-   [Introduction](#introduction)
    -   [The Big Picture](#the-big-picture)
    -   [Session info](#session-info)

# Introduction

Notes from the [R Packages book](https://r-pkgs.org/).

## The Big Picture

From [The Whole Game chapter](https://r-pkgs.org/whole-game.html).

-   Use the `devtools` package, which contains a set of packages that
    support package development.
-   Use `create_package()` to initialise a new package.
-   Use `use_r(function_name)` to create and/or open a script in `R/`.
-   Use `document()` to build the documentation.
-   Use `load_all()` to load all functions in `R/`; `load_all()`
    simulates the process of building, installing, and attaching.
-   Use `check()` to check that everything is working.
-   Use `install()` to install your package.
-   Use `use_git()` to make a Git repository.
-   Use `use_github()` to connect to GitHub.
-   Use `use_readme_rmd()` to create a template `README.Rmd` file then
    use `build_readme()` to render `README.md`.

## Session info

This document was generated by rendering `packages.Rmd` in RStudio
Server.

    ## [1] "2023-02-09 06:35:22 UTC"

Session info.

    ## R version 4.2.0 (2022-04-22)
    ## Platform: x86_64-pc-linux-gnu (64-bit)
    ## Running under: Ubuntu 20.04.4 LTS
    ## 
    ## Matrix products: default
    ## BLAS:   /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/openblas-pthread/libblas.so.3
    ## LAPACK: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/openblas-pthread/liblapack.so.3
    ## 
    ## locale:
    ##  [1] LC_CTYPE=en_US.UTF-8       LC_NUMERIC=C              
    ##  [3] LC_TIME=en_US.UTF-8        LC_COLLATE=en_US.UTF-8    
    ##  [5] LC_MONETARY=en_US.UTF-8    LC_MESSAGES=en_US.UTF-8   
    ##  [7] LC_PAPER=en_US.UTF-8       LC_NAME=C                 
    ##  [9] LC_ADDRESS=C               LC_TELEPHONE=C            
    ## [11] LC_MEASUREMENT=en_US.UTF-8 LC_IDENTIFICATION=C       
    ## 
    ## attached base packages:
    ## [1] stats     graphics  grDevices utils     datasets  methods   base     
    ## 
    ## other attached packages:
    ## [1] ggplot2_3.4.0
    ## 
    ## loaded via a namespace (and not attached):
    ##  [1] rstudioapi_0.14  knitr_1.40       magrittr_2.0.3   tidyselect_1.2.0
    ##  [5] munsell_0.5.0    colorspace_2.0-3 R6_2.5.1         rlang_1.0.6     
    ##  [9] fastmap_1.1.0    fansi_1.0.4      dplyr_1.1.0      stringr_1.5.0   
    ## [13] tools_4.2.0      grid_4.2.0       gtable_0.3.1     xfun_0.34       
    ## [17] utf8_1.2.3       cli_3.6.0        withr_2.5.0      htmltools_0.5.3 
    ## [21] yaml_2.3.6       digest_0.6.30    tibble_3.1.8     lifecycle_1.0.3 
    ## [25] vctrs_0.5.2      glue_1.6.2       evaluate_0.17    rmarkdown_2.17  
    ## [29] stringi_1.7.12   compiler_4.2.0   pillar_1.8.1     generics_0.1.3  
    ## [33] scales_1.2.1     pkgconfig_2.0.3
