R unit testing
================

  - [Introduction](#introduction)
      - [Initial setup](#initial-setup)
      - [Creating a test](#creating-a-test)
      - [Running tests](#running-tests)
      - [Session info](#session-info)

# Introduction

Notes from the [R Packages
book](https://r-pkgs.org/testing-basics.html).

## Initial setup

To use testthat with your package, run:

    usethis::use_testthat(3)

This will:

1.  Create a `tests/testthat` directory.

2.  Add testthat to the `Suggests` field in the `DESCRIPTION` and
    specify testthat 3e in the `Config/testthat/edition` field. The
    updated `DESCRIPTION` fields might look like:
    
    Suggests: testthat (\>= 3.0.0) Config/testthat/edition: 3

3.  Create a file `tests/testthat.R` that runs all your tests when `R
    CMD check` runs. For a package named “pkg”, the contents of this
    file will be something like:
    
    library(testthat) library(pkg)
    
    test\_check(“pkg”)

Do not edit `tests/testthat.R` manually. It is run during `R CMD check`
(and, therefore, `devtools::check())`, but is not used in most other
test-running scenarios (such as `devtools::test()` or
`devtools::test_active_file()`). If you want to do something that
affects all of your tests, there is almost always a better way than
modifying the boilerplate `tests/testthat.R` script.

This initial setup is usually something you do once per package.

## Creating a test

As you define functions in your packages in `R/`, you add the
corresponding tests to `.R` files in `tests/testthat`. It is strongly
recommended that the organisation of test files match the organisation
of `R/` files.

For example if a `foofy()` function (and its friends and helpers) are
defined in `R/foofy.R`, their tests should reside in
`tests/testthat/test-foofy.R`.

Even if you have different conventions for file organisation and naming,
note that testthat tests **must** reside in files inside
`tests/testthat/` and these file names **must** begin with `test`. The
test file name is displayed in testthat output, which provides helpful
context.

usethis offers a helpful pair of functions for creating or toggling
between files:

  - `usethis::use_r()`
  - `usethis::use_test()`

Either one can be called with a file (base) name in order to create a
new file and open it for editing.

Create and open `R/foofy.R`.

    use_r("foofy")

Create and open `tests/testthat/test-blarg.R`.

    use_test("blarg")

These two function has some convenience features that make them useful
in many common situations:

  - When determining the target file, they can deal with the presence or
    absence of the `.R` extension and the `test-` prefix.
      - `use_r("foofy.R")` and `use_r("foofy")` are the same.
      - `use_test("test-blarg.R")`, `use_test("blarg.R")`, and
        `use_test("blarg")` are the same.
  - If the target file already exists, it is open for editing. Otherwise
    the target is created and then opened for editing.

Furthermore, in RStudio, if `R/foofy.R` is the active file in the source
pane, calling `use_test()` with no arguments will create and/or open the
companion test file. This works the other way around too with `use_r()`.

When `use_test()` creates a new test file, it inserts an example test:

    test_that("multiplication works", {
       expect_equal(2 * 2, 4)
    })

  - A test file holds one or more `test_that()` tests.
  - Each test describes what it is testing such as whether
    multiplication works.
  - Each test has one or more expectations, e.g. `expect_equal(2
    * 2, 4)`.

## Running tests

Tests can be run at various scales depending on the development cycle.
For example when working on a specific function, testing will be
performed at the level of individual tests. As the code matures, testing
will be performed on entire test files and eventually the entire test
suite.

## Session info

This document was generated by rendering `testing.Rmd` using
`./rmd_to_md.sh`.

    ## [1] "2023-06-08 02:16:39 UTC"

Session info.

    ## R version 4.3.0 (2023-04-21)
    ## Platform: x86_64-pc-linux-gnu (64-bit)
    ## Running under: Ubuntu 22.04.2 LTS
    ## 
    ## Matrix products: default
    ## BLAS:   /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/openblas-pthread/libblas.so.3 
    ## LAPACK: /usr/lib/x86_64-linux-gnu/openblas-pthread/libopenblasp-r0.3.20.so;  LAPACK version 3.10.0
    ## 
    ## locale:
    ##  [1] LC_CTYPE=en_US.UTF-8       LC_NUMERIC=C              
    ##  [3] LC_TIME=en_US.UTF-8        LC_COLLATE=en_US.UTF-8    
    ##  [5] LC_MONETARY=en_US.UTF-8    LC_MESSAGES=en_US.UTF-8   
    ##  [7] LC_PAPER=en_US.UTF-8       LC_NAME=C                 
    ##  [9] LC_ADDRESS=C               LC_TELEPHONE=C            
    ## [11] LC_MEASUREMENT=en_US.UTF-8 LC_IDENTIFICATION=C       
    ## 
    ## time zone: Etc/UTC
    ## tzcode source: system (glibc)
    ## 
    ## attached base packages:
    ## [1] stats     graphics  grDevices utils     datasets  methods   base     
    ## 
    ## loaded via a namespace (and not attached):
    ##  [1] compiler_4.3.0  fastmap_1.1.1   cli_3.6.1       tools_4.3.0    
    ##  [5] htmltools_0.5.5 rstudioapi_0.14 yaml_2.3.7      rmarkdown_2.22 
    ##  [9] knitr_1.43      xfun_0.39       digest_0.6.31   rlang_1.1.1    
    ## [13] evaluate_0.21
